Most technology is built top-down, actively penalizing vulnerable groups, but a framework
called Design Justice flips this completely.
It asks, what happens when marginalized people get total control of the code?
Take this group of black high school students, tasked with designing an app to navigate daily
threats.
Standard tech usually views these students as data to be extracted, or problems to be
surveilled, and it's nearly impossible to build for true liberation using tools designed
to uphold existing power.
Design Justice shifts the power.
The app's features are dictated entirely by the lived experience of the most affected.
When the students built their interface, they started with a radar-style navigation system.
This lets users map and avoid racially hostile encounters in real time.
And if a confrontation happens, they didn't just add a standard 911 button.
Instead, victims report harassment to community partners, prioritizing safety over state-led
police surveillance.
The app even includes a feature to anonymously schedule therapy sessions for anxiety.
By designing a system that centers healing rather than punishment, they employed an
abolitionist approach to computing.
By putting their own lived experience at the very center of the design process, these
students used code to build a practical blueprint for a world that protects instead of police's.